Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loop. And
today I'm Jane, but Doctor Thomas Tao, he's Professor
of Metaphysics of Science at the University of Bristol.
He specializes in contemporary analytic metaphysics with an emphasis
on methodological and epistemic issues, namely meta metaphysics. And
today we're going to talk about exactly that Metta
Metaphysics, Metaphysics and some other related topics. So uh
Thomas, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thanks very much Ricardo. It's a, it's a pleasure
to be here.
So on the show, I've already had interviews on
physics on metaphysics, but he is the first, this
is the first one on me metaphysics. So I
guess that we will have to uh I, I
mean, walk a few small steps here into what
it is, but uh broadly speaking, what is Metta
mesic, how does it relate to metaphysics and what
sorts of questions does it deal with?
Exactly. Yeah. Good. Um I suppose it makes sense
to say just a few words about what I
think metaphysics is uh before we get to the
metaphysic meta Metaphysics. So um I take a broadly
Aristotelian view of uh of metaphysics uh as uh
be a study of being uh who are being
or being in itself. So something like um the
first philosophy uh as Aristotle would have put it
and uh uh that would include uh quite a
broad range of topics, obviously, things like uh ontological
categories and, and the relations between them. Uh But
uh you know, the whole spread of the usual
topics in metaphysics would would fall under, fall under
that. And uh if we get to metaphysics, well,
uh the idea is just that there is something
that it is like to do metaphysics or like
to study metaphysics. And uh Metta Mess would, would
ask that question, what it is to do Metaphysics.
So how do we get to knowledge or information
about those fundamental questions or philosophy that we study
in metaphysics? Um And that could take a number
of different shapes. So we could, we could look
at uh the epistemology of Metaphysics uh that would,
that would be part of Metta Metaphysics as scientist
standard or the methodology of metaphysics more broadly speaking.
So for instance, how does metaphysics relate to science,
natural science? How does it relate to uh the
a priori posti distinction again, back to epistemic issues?
Um How does it deal with things like uh
modality? So, study of possibility and necessity are metaphysical
truths necessary in some sense? Uh And if so,
in what sense um and uh broadly speaking, I
suppose metaphysics could also be seen to study the
role of metaphysics in philosophy. So how does me
metaphysics relate to other philosophical areas of inquiry? Is
there something especially problematic or difficult about metaphysics given
that it claims to study uh philosophy in this
sort of broader sense? Or if it's first philosophy
as Aristotle put it, what does that mean exactly
for uh for its role in, in philosophy? So
that would be a very sort of rough uh
list of topics that we could study in metaphysics
as I see it.
Oh OK. So several different uh topics that you
mentioned there that I would like to ask you
a little bit more about just to clarify things
here. So when you say that Metta Metaphysics is
also interested in how in how metaphysics relates to
other areas in philosophy. Uh So it also asks
question about questions about how, for example, it relates
to things like epistemology and perhaps other areas of
philosophy. But I would imagine that epistemology would be
a big one here, right? I mean, because uh
it's one thing to understand what reality is to
put it in simple terms or, or what reality
is composed of stuff like that. But another thing
is for us to really understand to what extent
we as humans can acquire knowledge about it. And
if we are acquiring, acquiring knowledge about reality, what
are we inquiring about? Exactly, right. I mean, is
that right. Or?
Yeah. No, that's exactly, that's exactly right. Um, I,
I often think of the relationship between metaphysics and
epistemology as being um two sides of the same
coin really. Uh BECAUSE you can't really uh do
metaphysics if you don't have some view about how,
what it is that you're uh trying to know,
know about and, and how you are, you are
going about uh that, that inquiry and, and similarly,
you can't really do epi epistemology, if you don't
have a target for, for that uh that uh
knowledge that you are, you are seeking. So, um
so I do think that they, they are very
closely related in, in that sense. Um And uh
I suppose, I mean, maybe it would be useful
to give a, give an example. So, so um
think about um uh think about the category of
structure of, of reality that we supposedly study, study
metaphysics. Now, uh if you think that that category
of structure of reality is something that is uh
just made up by, by people, it's mind dependent
in some sense or dependent on our concepts or
conceptualizations of reality, then it seems that the epistemic
question has to focus on the human mind. Uh
I suppose this might be a canteen answer to
that question. You know, the categories are in the
mind and we have to study the human mind.
Now, maybe there's something out outside the human mind
that these uh uh categories of the mind are
related to, but that might be um uh beyond
our uh beyond our reach in, in terms of
uh of, of our knowledge of the world. Or
if you think that those categories of reality are
mind independent, then obviously you must, you must tell
us something about how you intend to get to
those categories, perhaps involving the natural sciences or some
sort of interplay between metaphysics and the sciences.
Mhm And I guess that we also have to
keep in mind and this is very important for
us people, particularly in more developed countries and contemporary
societies to keep in mind is that metaphysics is
not necessarily a materialistic or about a naturalistic approach
when it relates to epistemology and naturalistic approach to
knowledge, right? I mean, it can be about other
conceptualizations of reality that are not necessarily based on
materialism or some other, some version of that that
tends to go associated with the um scientific inquiry.
Sure, that's, that's true. So it's just as much
a part of metaphysics and indeed meta metaphysics um
to, to study reality from uh an idealistic point
of view, for instance, think of uh uh uh
George Barclay, um who, who had an idealistic framework
where uh which is upheld by God, of course,
uh in, in Barclay's philosophy. But uh uh the
question is then how uh how do we construct
the reality and how is it dependent on our
minds or, or God's mind in, in, in Barclay's
case. Um And this is, this is not a
naturalistic framework. Uh But it is a realist framework
of sorts, even if it has this idealist uh
underpinning. And similarly, you could, you could start from,
from other starting points like that. Those would, those
would be in the scope of metaphysics uh very
much. So that's, that's true.
So let's put a pin on the realistic uh
bit of it, the realistic bit that you mentioned
there because we're going to get into that in
a second. But I I in your first answer,
you mentioned ontology or uh if I remember correctly
ontological entities, for example, are there differences between metaphysics
and ontology? Because o of course, I'm not a
philosopher myself, but I have to, to tell you
that many times when I hear philosophers talking about
metaphysics and ontology, uh I'm not completely sure if
there's a strict separation there and if there's one
ex uh where exactly it falls. So
yeah, good. That is a good question to, to,
to ask. Um OFTEN the, the notions of metaphysics
and ontology are used more or less synonymously, but
we, we can definitely make a distinction between them.
Um And I suppose you might say that ontology
is a slightly narrower notion. So if on, on
ontology studies, what there is Metaphysics studies, uh something
um uh sort of a broader set of set
of things, let's say me metaphysics might include the
study of free will ontology perhaps not. So, um
so uh this is a rough and ready distinction.
I must, I must say so we could, we
could make a, make a more formal distinction. But
given that people use these notions quite synonymously often,
it's not, it's not easy to do so. Um
SO sometimes equally, the notions of meta metaphysics and
meal on technology are used uh like this. But
you, I think that meta ontology is a slightly
narrow area of uh of focus again, whereas Metaphysics
studies Metaphysics as a whole or the methodology of
metaphysics as a whole and ontology is focused on
um something a bit more precise such as uh
what falls into those categories uh of, of being
and what, what does exist?
Mhm Right. Uh And so what are the different
theories about how we can classify and categorize reality?
Yeah, I mean, I, I guess that I've already
ended up mentioning and you a few of them
like for example, the materialistic ones or the idealistic
ones. But how would you categorize, let's say the
different approaches out there?
Yeah, good. Yeah, we've, we've mentioned uh category ontological
categories uh already a few times. Um And uh
then the sort of more um I suppose met
metaphysical positions which are realism and idealism or uh
sometimes also we talk about deflation is so we
shouldn't really be thinking about metaphysics at all on
a deflationary uh conception because uh all the questions
studied in metaphysics would end up being studied in
one of the special sciences or in other areas
of philosophy such as philosophy and language perhaps. So,
so there are a few different ways to, to,
to look at that question. Um But you can't
really answer that before you have some idea about
what metaphysics is about either. Um So, so the
way I would see it, um and this is
just one answer to it is that metaphysics is
indeed about studying those uh ontological categories. And uh
the different theories about ontological categories could then be
idealistic as well as realistic. So you might think
that um the different categories of, of property and,
and uh and substance and relations and whatever those
categories are, we can talk more about that. But
you might think that some of those cations are
mind dependent or mind independent. So on either view,
you would be studying the categorization of reality, right?
But you would just have a, have a different
perspective on that.
I, I would imagine that probably one of the
lys examples and please correct me if I'm wrong
of an idealistic stance on metaphysics would be Plato's
right. Yeah, that's, that's right. So Plato's uh answer
to, you know, a specific metaphysical problem that has
a, has a venerable history. The problem of the
many what, what is similar across uh many different
things um is, is an, is an idealistic problem.
So, there's, there's a, there's a form or an
idea of, uh, something like, uh, beauty which is
shared across all, all beautiful things, of course. And
for Plato, they would be in this Platonic heaven,
um, which I suppose is, uh, it is, I
suppose a mind independent place in some ways but
it's, uh, it's idealistic in, uh, in the sense
that it's not, it's not in the material reality
in the same way. So how do you classify
these different uh historical views is, is maybe controversial
but, but yes, there's a, there's a level of
idealism there,
by the way, you mentioned mind independent there and,
and that's actually something that sometimes, uh it confuses
me a little bit when, for example, people in
meta ethics uh use those kinds of terms. I
mean, about moral values, moral truths, the moral realists
many times say that they are mind independent. So,
uh I mean, because perhaps it's me that I
haven't studied math physics or meta ethics specifically or
from a or at an academic level. So perhaps
there is some of this is harder for me
to understand because of that. But what does mind
independent really mean? I mean, what would that correspond
to? Because for us as humans that I guess
that's very hard to understand when it comes to
the metaphysical side of things, what that would correspond
to exactly when we're talking about things like concepts,
moral values and other things like that
good. I mean, I, I think you're asking exactly
the right question. I, I've, uh I've used the
notion of mind independence or mind dependence. Uh Partly
because, um, we have some sort of intuitive idea
of what, what that might mean, but actually it,
it turns out to be quite difficult to specify
it accurately. So, so you're, you're right to ask
that question. Um So, um, well, maybe, maybe the
first thing to say is, uh human minds are,
are, are of course part of reality, whatever that
reality is. So, in, in that sense, uh uh
it, it's, it's, it's strange to talk about mind
independence because we are, we are part of the
world and we're studying our own minds just as
well as we are studying the rest of reality.
So, in that sense, uh everything, everything is dependent
on the minds in so far as minds are
part of reality. But when, when we talk about
mind independence and philosophy, the sort of first rough
and ready characterization might be something like, well, uh
it's not made up by us, uh if it's
mind independent. So, uh it's not dependent on what
names we might call it or what our thoughts
about. It might be this whatever this might independent
thing is. Um, BUT it's something, something, uh that
would be exactly the way it is if we
weren't here to observe it and conceptualize it. Um,
NOW that's, uh, that's only a rough and ready
answer because you might think of different ways to,
to problematic it, think of um I'll, I'll give
you an example, think of something like um trans
Uan elements um which we synthesize in la laboratories,
um uh elements like Einstein and now they're not
naturally occurring. So, uh they wouldn't exist without us
being here to synthesize them, but that doesn't really
make them mind dependent in the sense that we
might be interested in here. Because you might think
that, well, uh if the world had been configured
slightly differently, those sort of elements, uh uh transgenic
elements could exist, they just have very short half
lives and they, they uh disintegrate very quickly. Um
So even if we needed to give some sort
of active input to bring that thing into existence,
it doesn't make it mind dependent in any kind
of very interesting sense. Uh BECAUSE we do not
design its nature in a way. We do not
design what it's like. We just uh use, use
our technological tools to, to uh to bring it
about. Um So I'm, I'm not sure if that's
helpful, but uh maybe it gives you one way
to kind of get a more nuanced sense of
what, what we might need me by my independence.
No, I this is a very interesting discussion to
have because I mean, I come from a s
mostly scientific background and so perhaps when I think
about or when I hear people talking about mind,
independent entities, mind the independent something out there. Uh
Perhaps it's because of my own uh intellectual framework
with the scientific background that I always tend to
think as things as instantiated, physically or materialistically. And
so perhaps there's a, there's an obstacle there in
terms of my intellectual framework, in terms of understanding,
how would something like uh concepts or moral values
would be minded dependent. Because for me honestly, that's
almost meaningless because I can't really conceptualize uh the
exis uh how uh things like that would exist
in reality outside of human minds be because again,
probably, I mean, instantiating them uh physically materialistically. So,
uh I, I mean, what by the way, what
do you think about that? Do you think that
perhaps when it comes to these metaphysical or Metta
metaphysical conceptualizations that perhaps the sort of intellectual frameworks
we are operating under limit some of our understanding
or perhaps uh understanding some uh alternative positions out
there that are non materialistic or something like that?
Uh Good, interesting. I mean, there's a few, there's
a few questions there. II, I mean, firstly, I
suppose I would, I would say, I would say
yes, surely our um our um framework, the framework
that we start out with does limit uh the
way we conceptualize these things or, or conceive of
them. But I mean, that's just the starting point,
right? So we can, we can kind of uh
discuss and and, and come to an agreement but
on the, on the sort of, uh, the broader
question on the background. So how, how would something
like, uh, you know, normative properties, you mentioned meta
ethics here and moral, moral properties like that, how
could they even be mind independent in any sort
of sense? Well, I, I mean, there are positions
in, in sort of moral naturalistic um frameworks where,
uh, where you might think that uh there is
a way to understand these uh moral properties as
ma material in a, in a sense. But that's
probably not the usual uh usual way to way
to go because we don't, we wouldn't describe normative
properties to, you know, fundamental particles or something like
that. But, but, you know, it could be done,
people talk about it in panpsychism, of course, that
there's something in, um, in something like a mind
like, um substance already in, in, in, in fundamental
particles. But uh that's just to give a, give
a context for this problem. Uh The, the broader
point you make is that if our minds are
indeed part of reality and normative properties are some
somehow dependent on those minds, then perhaps there is
a, a way to understand those normative properties as
material just uh uh uh on the basis of,
uh of how our minds minds work in as
instantiated in the material world as well. So if
you've got a, a physical or materialist view about
the mind. There's no reason why you couldn't return
normative properties in the same way. But now we've
stepped into ma ethics. Of course.
No, of course. I mean, let's try to, to
avoid that because it's really not something that falls
under the scope of these interviews. So, uh, but
let's get into realist positions and anti realist positions
in, uh, I guess we could say mathematics its
here. So, what is the realist position? What does
that mean? Exactly.
Yeah. So uh we have anticipated this in a
bit, of course, because uh one way to, to
define a realist position is by way of mind,
independence that we have talked about. So you might
say that if uh let's say the ontological categories
do exist mind independently in the world, be it
be material or non material by the way. So
the, the materialist part isn't necessary part of realism
here. Um But you, you could say that it's
a realist position if those categories exist independently of
us. Um um uh Whereas an anti realist position
would, would then say, uh uh I mean, one
version of it would, would say that it is,
it is up to us how to uh uh
uh how to conceptualize how to divide up reality.
And uh the, the, the categories do not exist
outside our language or outside uh our own conceptualization.
I mean, that's a very rough and ready way
to, to uh compare realism and anti realism. And
of course, uh I think it's always important to
note that uh you can be realist about some
areas of metaphysics or inquiry and anti realist about
others. So these aren't necessarily uh correctly conceived as
global positions. So you might be realist about um
there being a category of uh of universals, universal
properties such as uh such as redness or, or
beauty as mentioned before from, from Plato. Uh BUT
you could be anti realist about, about other things,
let's say, um you could be anti realist about
those normative properties or uh social categories or something
like that, you could have a different uh constructivist
view about those sort of things which is mind
dependent and anti realist in a, in a manner
of speaking. Uh And indeed, probably most of us
are realist about some things and anti realist about,
about other things.
Mhm uh And so, uh I mean, let me
just ask you about an, an example that for
me perhaps gets a little bit into murky waters
because probably it's very hard to tell where's the
separation here between metaphysics and epistemology. But getting into,
for example, the position of uh Emmanuel Kent when
he called, when he talked about the New Manon
and the phenomenon, um I mean, uh uh a
as I understand it, it would be then uh
a realist position because at least when he talks
about the Ninon, he is referring to the existence
of something that is mind independent, right? But when
it comes to the phenomenon, uh I mean, is,
or do you think that he would be referring
to uh something metaphysical there or is strictly referring
to epistemology in the sense that we as humans
with our perceptual limitations can only live, I guess,
psychologically with in the these phenomenological world, but can't
really get direct access into what uh the thing
itself or the real world, I guess we could
say is, I mean, what are your ideas about
it?
Yeah, I mean, I should, I should preface this
by saying that uh uh I'm no Kant scholar.
So I leave the K exegesis to, to, to
those who can read the original German. But um
uh but I, I do know that uh it
while Kant is usually interpreted as, as uh um
not quite an anti realist position but as something
that talks about um uh or is mainly focused
is mainly focused on the, on the mind dependent
categories in our, in our minds, that there are
different interpretations of Kant where, where a sort of
more realist uh position is possible. But you're right
to say that uh the epistemic and the metaphysical
agendas are very mixed up here because it does
seem that uh Kant accepts the existence of objective
reality outside our minds. So it's rare this position.
But, but perhaps he thought that we just can't
get any kind of information about it. So everything
that we perceive is filtered through these categories which
are, are uh sort of anthropocentric uh uh biases
in a way. Uh So we, we can't get
those, get those, those glasses of our, of our
eyes. Um But yes, I mean, you, you might,
you might have this type of anti realistic reading
of, of content and that's perhaps what he thought.
But the immediate question is, um where do, where
do those categories uh that, that we have in
our minds? Where do those glasses come from? And
why do they filter reality in this sort of
way? Uh Is it, isn't it more likely that
there is something of a glimpse of the true
structure of reality? Uh Even if it is filtered
through these glasses, um uh and uh indeed would
beings very, very different from us uh not share
at least some of those uh those categorizations.
Mhm Yeah. II I mean, something that I was
trying to get at with that question is also
to what extent um the things that we would
classify as mind dependent would also or could also
be uh considered within a realist position that is
if uh things that are that we consider to
be mind dependent uh could also be considered within
uh Matam Mess uh as uh I mean, understood
within a realist position, that is so, I, I
mean, this is very hard to explain, to talk
about for me, but le let me try my
best here. So for example, if we're talking about
uh red as a caller, there are people out
there that would just say that because it is
uh or apparently at least if you understand it
through a physics framework, it is just a construct
of our, a useful construct of our brains to
deal with certain aspects of reality. And then you
can also add evolutionary theory to that and neuroscience
that the red itself does not exist, it just
uh useful mind dependent construct of reality. So some
people would just say so it's not real and
that, that's it. But then there are other people
that probably would say that uh redness exists as
a some sort of property of reality, but that
property is not exactly what we experience through our
senses. And so, I mean, the property itself would
be real but what we experience through our senses,
uh I mean, I guess they would say it's
not uh real, it's just uh again a useful
construct. But then, I mean, are there positions where
perhaps even though what we experience might not correspond
to whatever property is out there in reality, people
would still consider uh that mind, mind dependent construct
also real. And so there would be two layers,
let's say of reality or uh uh I mean,
uh perhaps I'm being a bit confusing here. I
I'm not sure.
Well, no, I think you've um uh you've captured
the situation regarding color quite, quite well there. And
I, I am sympathetic to, to the idea that
you outlined there, which is uh which is a
form of a limit is about color, so, or
anti realism about color if you like. So, uh
so the color properties that we talk about redness
and so on. Uh Well, you know, they're part
of our phenomenology um but, but they don't correspond
to real properties in the, in the same sense
as well. Nuclear charge might be. Um Now, of
course, people might, might often say when we talk
about colors that well look colors, they just correspond
to the wavelengths of the, of the light. Um
But, but the color experience doesn't seem to follow
that quite, quite in, in that way. And indeed,
we know that um that women and men can
experience color quite, quite differently, partially because of uh
uh physical characteristics, women are better at it.
Yeah. And there are some women actually that are
that chromatic. I think
that's what I had in mind. Uh So, so
there are, there are differences in our color experiences
uh probably in other ways as well. Um So,
so all of these things do do make me
um more sympathetic to the sort of anti realism
about color. It's unfortunate that color is also always
the example of a real property that's mentioned because
of this, but it is what it is. Um
But maybe I'll give you another example, and we
can, we can uh we can uh get a
bit deeper into this because um there are cases
which I think you were after that seem like
they are mind uh dependent or indeed not quite
real in the same sense as some of those
other properties that we might talk about are. But
still we seem to think that we need to
be able to talk about them and there's something
real behind them. So what's, what's going on there?
So think about uh a mental illness or a
psychological uh uh condition of, of some sort like
that. Well, that is very much dependent on, on
the mind of, of the person who has that
condition, I suppose. Uh NO one would all presumably
deny that even if there is a physical uh
uh characteristic that underpins it. Uh But also we
wouldn't want to say that it's, it's not, it's
not real, it's not real property to have a,
have a certain kind of mental illness. Now, the
right question to ask then is uh what, what
underlies, what kind of mechanism perhaps underlies that condition.
And then we classify these conditions based on uh
you know, DS M five in, in, in, in
psychology. Um But often, often what uh what we're
sort of classifying where we're basing those, those uh
classifications on are just uh um behaviors or something
like that, that are externally perceivable like that. So,
when we ask, when, when we try to identify
a condition, let's say depression. Um Well, we want
to know what the underpinning mechanisms are and is
it a single condition or is it perhaps just
a, a variety of different things that come together
and, and manifest in that sort of behavior that
a depressed person typically uh manifests. Um But there's
something real behind there, we might, we, we might
just not know what exactly is, is giving rise
to this condition. And, and the right question to
then ask is, is it, is it one thing
or is it several different things? Uh What, in
either case, there's something real there? Maybe there's a
real dere uh uh natural kind as we say,
called depression or maybe there are several different things
going on under there and we just classified them
together as a sort of syndrome. Uh CALL it
depression because we don't really know what the underlying
mechanisms are. Does that make sense?
Yeah, it makes sense. II, I mean, perhaps uh
a sort of metaphor or analogy here to pick
on uh Plato's allegory of the cave would be,
I mean, do you think that there are stances
in Metta mess where people would consider to be
real? Both the people outside the cave and there
are shadows inside the cave? I mean, do, do
you understand what I'm trying to uh to arrive
at here? I mean, are, are there instances where
people would say OK, so there's something real out
there that is not what we experience, but what
we experience is also real. I mean, is there
something like that out there or not?
Yeah. Um HM I don't have a good example
in mind but uh but maybe we can talk
about it in the abstract as well. So um
so, so uh I mean, clearly we, we, we,
if we think of the scientific context, we clearly
try to think that we're trying to map reality
in some ways, you know, we talk about, talk
about properties that are fairly well defined, such as
such as uh electric charge and so on. But,
but let's say, let's say that we are in
Plato's Cave and what we're actually perceiving are just
those, those shadows right now. Uh I suppose any
kind of uh uh uh uh metaphysical realist might
still like to say that um Well, even if
that is the case, um we are observing something
that is a glimpse of what the real world
is is like. So, um so you, you might
think that there's a, there's a kind of a
magnetism to the real thing that is causing, seeing
the shadow, even if it is uh in reality,
uh a couple of different things that we're mixing
up together like the depression case maybe or uh
it's not exactly as we thought it is because
of uh uh whatever, whatever biases or, or limitations
of knowledge, we we might have. So, so you
might think that there's a um I mean, you
could combine this to usual philosophy of science question
uh discussions like uh no miracles argument. There's, it
would be a miracle if we, if we were
able to be so successful in science and make
all the predictions in science. If we didn't, if
we hadn't grasped something about the real connections and
uh in reality that underlie whatever the shadows on
the wall might, might show us. Um So perhaps
this is, this is uh tracking what you had
in mind. Um
Y yeah, I, I guess it is, I guess
it is. So, uh le let's now move on
to another topic. Um You in your work, I've
read about uh you writing about the distinction between
substance and property. So what is the distinction there?
What and what is the substance and what is
the property
exactly? Yeah. Good. So we're, we're getting uh to
the basics in that uh these are often uh
candidates for fundamental ontological categories. So we talked about
ontological categories and substance. The category of substance. The
category of property are probably the two most commonly
mentioned ones. Um Now property is, is maybe easier
to uh to grasp because property is just things
like, well, those color properties that we talked about,
be they real or not uh or indeed uh
charge or mass or um spin uh to take,
to take sort of supposedly fundamental physical properties first.
Um uh And uh the usual way to talk
about this would be that uh the, the properties
are instantiated in some way. So, uh, so they
are in, in reality, uh And where are they
instantiated with? Well, they might be instantiated in a
substance. So something that holds those properties to together.
Uh So take an electron, uh if electron is
a substance, it's a, it's an, it's an object,
it has properties, it has uh unit charge half
in to spin and a certain mass. Now, those
three properties are instantiated in that substance. The electron.
The problem of course, here is which Barkley put
better than anyone else that I can think of
is, well, when we observe these things such as
an electron, well, we observe the properties, right, we,
we can measure the charge and the spin and
the mass. But once we take those properties away,
where, where's the, where's the substance? We can't observe
the substance, we can't, we can't point to the
substance uh unless it's just a matter that uh
uh constitutes uh the uh the, the object. But
then if you take the mass and the, and,
and all that away, then then that seems to
be where the matter goes as well. So um
that's a, that's a nice way to, to immediately
problematic the, the distinction between substance and property. And
of course, some people think that there are no
substances, there's just properties bundled together. So a bundle
theory of properties would say that well, that's all
there is to be an electron, it's to have
those properties. But then you still have a problem
of saying, well, what, why do those properties go
together? What unifies those properties into a single object?
And that's the to problematic the other side of
it. So, so I think it's nice to think
about uh the uh the, the obvious thing that
uh the obvious uh distinction that we, we can
make here. But uh the difficulty of actually uh
making either one of those solutions uh work. But,
but by the way, when we talk here about
substances, we are assuming a substance ontology, right? Because
there are, there's also other alternatives like a process
ontology. And I've just recently started getting into this
on the show, I've got into process ontology, approaches
to psychology, neuroscience, biology and other scientific disciplines. But
we are making that assumption here, right? That substance
ontology is correct.
Yeah. So uh w when people talk about substance
ontology, they, they generally have in mind something like
uh well, something resembling a sort of traditional Aristotelian
picture where, where substance is, is uh uh in
some ways the primary category. Uh So uh so
you have to have a substance and it has
to be uh characterized by some properties as, as
we just talked about. Um But yes, you could
have a different kind of ontology. So So we're
just talking about the two categories. So you could
have a two category ontology, you have substance and
you have properties. But uh you could, you could
just have the properties. People have tried to, tried
to get it by with just one category of
properties. But then uh some people have proposed that,
well, if you really want to capture everything that's
going on in reality and in, in science, uh
you have to talk about events or processes as
well as you as you've pointed out. So some
people think that we need a category of event
or process. Uh And indeed, that is uh really
a fundamental category because things develop over time, uh
like processes do and we can't really understand um
what reality without, you know, including that dimension as
a fundamental part of it. So I think that
that's something that motivates process onto uh biological processes
in particular if we want to understand those. Um
So, um
yeah, but by the way, as you understand it
uh process onto, do you think that they are
completely excluding? I, I mean, to put it perhaps
in simplistic terms, uh things, substances, objects out there
beca because I mean, I mean, maybe again, this
is perhaps some of the limitations that are inherent
to uh the way we approach science in the
West. This is something that I've already also talked
about on the show. I mean, we tend to
think about uh things about atoms, for example, electrons.
And perhaps we're going to get into that later
on when we talk, when we talk about building
blocks. But um me even the process onto unless
you just uh talk uh about things in mathematical
terms, like in complexity science, I mean, you don't
need to use terms like atoms, electrons. Uh I,
I don't know, um personality traits or something like
that. I if you just want to uh uh
present things, method in mathematical terms, but uh even
in psychology and neuroscience and so on, people still
talk about uh uh things. I mean, it's, it's
not just the process itself but a thing. So
uh I mean, are they excluding co or completely
excluding something that we would call uh substances or
that people in metaphysics would understand their substances or?
So uh so not necessarily. So you could, you
could think that processes or events are a fundamental
ontological category, but you could still also accept substances,
you know, processes could be something that happens to
the substances and the substances carry their properties with
them through this process or something like that. So,
uh uh you know, you could have, you could
have uh as you know, I had 10 categories,
fundamental categories. Um AND some of them included events
like uh categories, uh contemporary metaphysicians try to get
away with fewer ontological categories. So you, you would
see a trend that, well, if you can get
way just with processes, you, you, you should probably
try that. And similarly, um uh there are people
who think that relations are the fundamental category. So
structural realism is, is a position in this space
where you, where you try to eliminate the category
of substance. And uh uh and just uh say
that um relations are, are the more fundamental or
at least equally fundamental as, as as the things.
So, so, you know, all of these options are
open in the, in the logical uh space, but
all other things being equal, if you think you
can do all the explaining you need in science
and in metaphysics with fewer categories, then you should,
you know, get a get by with fewer categories
that I think that's a widely shared sharing motivation.
OK. So could you tell us now what is
uh first philosophy, what it really means? Because, II,
I mean, when I was 18 years old, I
ventured into reading the carts uh meditations on first
philosophy. And perhaps you now can finally explain to
me what that really means because back then I
was really confused,
good. Um I think I mentioned uh first philosophy
in passing uh in, in uh in giving my
Aristotelian motivation. So it, it, it's a term that
comes from, from Aristotle, OK. Descartes was reflecting on,
on the same, same topic and, and, and many
people after him. But um but it's an Aristotelian
idea um where metaphysics is something like um the
foundation of our um of our philosophical inquiry. So
um uh so then if you study, if you
study some of the so called special sciences, um
you study biology or you study physics, you know,
I Aristotle physics uh included here, then, then those
would be uh somehow more constrained areas of inquiry,
whereas metaphysics would be studying the whole of reality.
Uh And uh and not perhaps going into the
same level of detail, but all those other things
now, maybe, maybe from a contemporary perspective, you, you
could just talk about philosophy and then the special
sciences. Um BUT metaphysics, at least to, to my
mind does have this sort of a prior role
um to, to other areas of uh of, of
philosophy. Um PRECISELY because you can't really say very
much about any of the specialist topics such as,
you know, ethics or, or indeed, epistemology, if you
don't have some idea of what, what the metaphysics
are like. Um Now that doesn't necessarily mean that
you always start um in a temporal order first
doing metaphysics and then doing these other things. Uh
It's, it's more of a, more of an ontological
claim that uh that you need a metaphysical underpinning
for whatever it is that you're doing because you
can't otherwise uh you know, constrain your inquiry in
the, in the correct way if you like. Um
NOT sure if that's going to uh solve all
your, your problems from your, from your youth and
reading the car. But uh but I hope it,
it makes sense.
Yeah. No, it makes sense. And another thing that
I read about in your work is about the
notion of a minimal truth maker. So what is
that, what we, what are we talking about here
in the context of uh Metta metaphysics?
Uh Good. So uh uh to keep it simple,
let's, let's first uh just uh uh specify what,
what a truth maker is. So the truth maker
is, is thought to be something. Um I mean,
people have different views about exactly how this is
to be specified, but it's, it's something that makes
a given sentence, a given proposition true. So if
you have a uh if you have a uh
a claim such as there are electrons in the
world, well, that claim we, we think is true
and it's made true by uh by the fact
that there are electrons or indeed by the actual
electrons, the entities that uh that exist, you know,
assuming that they exist. So, uh we want to
be able to, to track the truth values of
our, of our sentences, the truth of our propositions.
And to do so we need to be able
to uh uh give uh uh or point to
the, the relevant truth maker. So, so the proposition
or the sentence would be the truth bearer and
whatever makes it true uh is the truth maker
Um So some people just talk about facts, like
I mentioned the fact that there are electrons, but
the fact that there are electrons could uh be
thought to consist of uh of the actual uh
material things in the world, the electrons now. Uh
So that's, that's, I think a fairly intuitive sense
of uh of, of a, of truth maker. So,
so we need something that makes things true. There
might be things that are um uh you know,
that where there's difficult to point to the truth
maker such as uh some necessary truths. Uh uh
And there's a discussion about these things. But uh
but these are, these are kind of uh uh
specific uh specific issues of how you, you specify
the truth maker theory. So you might think that
not all truths need truth maker in this sort
of this sort of way as well. But I
do think that the notion of, of minimal truth
maker that you've mentioned has a, has a special
importance because uh you might say things like this,
you know, someone asks, well, um what, what makes
it true that there are, there are electrons, what,
what makes it, what makes anything true? And someone
can give you an answer that that is correct,
strictly speaking, which is to say that well, the
world, the world makes it. So, you know, the
world as a whole, the universe, you know, you,
you might hear an answer like this and you
know, strictly speaking, it's, it's a correct answer because
the world does include those electorates as well. But
it includes all the other things as well. It
includes, includes everything, absolutely everything. So just to say
that, well, all, all the true claims that you
might utter are made to by the world as
a whole is not very informative. And this is
where we need the notion of minimal truth maker,
which is just the uh smallest portion of reality
that does make that proposition true. Now, using the
same example, there are electrons, that proposition is made
true by any one of the individual electrons. If
there are many uh that exist, you need just
one of them for that proposition to be true.
Uh But uh you don't need to mention anything
further than that first one of them that you
encounter to uh uh to give, you know, the
full truth maker for that, for that uh proposition
as it were. So uh uh we want to
be, we want to be able to track uh
the truth of the of whatever claims we made
as accurately as possible. We might not always be
in a position to do so, in which case,
we could go to the higher level. But that's,
that's the goal
a and what are natural kinds? I mean, when
we in philosophy, people refer to natural kinds, what
do they mean by that
good? Um This is a topic that I've uh
I've written a lot about and uh I actually
think that natural kinds are one of the fundamental
categories. Uh One of the fundamental anthology categories which
we've talked about. So um the good way to
think about this is, is uh is by, by
mentioning those examples, I've been using the electron example
all the time. Uh So electrons would be uh
a potential uh example of a, of a natural
kind as would be things like uh water or
gold or uh you know, things like that. Also
biological species I mentioned as, as candidates, there's controversy
about what exactly uh should be, should be contained
in, in, in those natural kinds. And uh people
debate especially about whether things like psychological kinds. I
mentioned depression before more social kinds such as money
or, you know, race or gender would, would those
be natural kinds? Um Either way uh what makes
a natural kind real is, is often thought to
be something like that criteria of mind independence. In
which case, some of those social kinds that I
mentioned would be uh immediately problematic, but they're less
problematic if we specify that mind dependence criterion a
bit more. But, but usually uh the sort of
less controversial examples are supposed to be more fundamental
uh kinds such as such as those chemical kinds,
you know, gold uh or water or indeed electrons.
But there's debates about all of these um as
as a matter of fact. But um I think
the sort of broader motivation here is to answer
one of the questions that I mentioned earlier, which
is what um what keeps the properties together of
uh of something like an electron. Well, if you
can uh refer to the natural kind, uh universal
that is underlying uh any kind of natural kind
such as an electron, then that would be responsible
for keeping those properties uh together uh whether or
not you have substances in fact.
So uh I mean, I guess that it's important
to keep in mind here that when people talk
about natural kinds, they do not necessarily have a
reductionist approach to them. There is they are not
necessarily trying to reduce everything to physics. For example,
as some people try to do or some people
suggest that we should do.
Right? Yeah, that's true. So um some people take
the view in philo science that uh a natural
kind is whatever we need um in in science
to um uh make inductive generalizations and, and predictions.
So, and you might think that you need all
sorts of higher level kinds for that purpose, including
uh psychological kinds that, that we've, we've mentioned here.
Um And you might think that there's nothing particularly
um uh uh well, particularly metaphysically interesting behind those
things except that they are a useful epistemic tool.
So that might be, you might take a sort
of an instrumental view of, of kinds as well.
Uh So, so it depends on, on what you,
what you regard natural kinds to be, uh what
their reality is, is in this sense. But you're
right to say that you don't have to be
reductionist, uh about, uh, about kinds. Um, ALTHOUGH I'm
sympathetic to some, some of the more reduction views
about them, I should say.
Yeah. No, I, I mean, I actually have to
tell you that I, I used to be one
of those people that thought that perhaps we should
try to idealistically reduce everything to physics, but perhaps
the way I got out of there was not
very common, it was just that uh I noticed
that I was not intelligent enough to, to deal
with physics. I just prefer to deal with things
in biological, even chemical and psychological terms. It's easier
for me.
I uh if I can add one thing on
that, I think uh we shouldn't confuse the reductionist
project as, as uh um you know, reducing everything
to the, to the language of theoretical or fundamental
physics if you like. So you could still, you
could still hold on to those uh uh terms,
the biological concepts for instance, or chemical concepts, even
if you thought that uh metaphysically there, there is
a reduction down there. But um I mean, that
doesn't mean that it's easy to, you know, perform
that reduction. But I don't think that we have
to eliminate all the high level terminology even if
we have a reduction.
Sure. And I, I guess that, uh, I, I
hope this is a good point to introduce this
topic because I had save it for later on
in our conversation. But since you've already mentioned, uh,
terms like fundamental here several times, what does that
mean exactly? Beca because some, uh, it might seem
obvious, but perhaps the notion of fundamentality in metaphysics
is more complicated than just thinking that, oh, it's
something that is really at the basis of reality
just to put it in simple terms, perhaps it's
more complicated than that.
Right. Well, it's so the way we use the
notion of fundamentality in philosophy and metaphysics, it's certainly
related to the sort of colloquial use of fundamentality.
So we talk about fundamental physics. Well, what does
it deal with? Well, something like the standard model
of particle physics, it lists uh uh all these,
all these things that uh do not have further
structure that we know of anyway. Um AND uh
and they sort of build up other things in
some ways. Yeah. So, so that, that is one
view and I suppose a fairly common view about
fundamentality. Uh BUT it has, it has in its
uh background, the idea that uh the whatever the
the bigger things are, what the higher level things
are, they depend in some sense on the lower
level things. So, so often we, we are interested
in this sort of comparative fundamentality, we say well,
you know, electrons are more fundamental than uh than
uh the atoms that uh they are part of.
Uh SO the, the part of is key there.
So we, we're looking for the, the smallest parts
in some ways, but that's, that is just one
way to think about fundamentality. Um YOU know, the
sort of a mereological part, whole structure. And in
fact, you might think that there are reasons uh
uh to conceive of the whole, the bigger part
of the universe as it were as the more
fundamental one. So Jonathan Schaffer famously argues for this
type of view. Uh BUT uh you might, you
might look at fundamentality slightly differently as well. You
might, you might think that, well, it's not necessarily
the smallest thing or the, or the largest thing,
but it's, it's whatever you need to get everything
that there is. So what I mean by that
is that uh that you, you need some sort
of a basis um and not necessarily the smallest
thing basis, but some, some sort of ontological basis
uh that is, is minimal and that you don't
need anything else just like with minimal truth maker.
Um BUT it's sufficient to give you all the
other structure or all the, all the other entities
that they are in the world. And that basis
could then be uh complicated in various ways. It
could involve uh dependence, relations among its itself. Uh
And it could improve, include bigger and smaller things
perhaps. But that would give you, you know, everything
that there is. So that's, that's one way to
look at fundamentality. You, you, you try to focus
on the smallest uh group of entities or facts
if you like that, give you everything else.
A a and when it comes to fundamentality as
we tend to think about it in the context
of physics, for example, I mean, I guess that
the picture over time is getting increasingly complicated because
now we not only have electrons but also quarks
and other smaller entities, I guess we could call
them. So, I mean, it really, if you're trying
to build a picture of fundamentality in metaphysics or
reality, whatever you want to call it, then on
the basis of the smallest possible entities that we
can find, uh I guess that over time it's
getting increasingly complicated to really uh uh find the
smallest possible thing that we can find out there.
Yeah, definitely. And of course, we've, uh we've, we've
assumed a number of times or science has assumed
a number of times that we're already there. We've
found the smallest things. Uh BUT there's further substructure
that is, is just been discovered uh afterwards. And
who's to say that there wouldn't be even further
substructure now, that doesn't matter so much for the
philosophical idea of fundamentality. Uh If you just think
that it's, well, whatever the smallest things are. But
uh if there were to be an infinite sequence
going down, then that would be, that would be
a problem. And that's perhaps where you could motivate
some, some alternative views. So if there isn't a
bottom level to be, to, to be discovered, if
there is some, some sort of infinite descent of
uh of dependence on, on uh uh lower down,
then, then that would be a problem for some
of these, some of these views. Now, of course,
there wouldn't be any way to, to really know
that that's the case because if it's an infinite
descent, then, you know, you're never gonna get to
the end. But of course, there isn't really a
way to know that there isn't such a dissenter
either because, uh, you know, you, you, you've only
seen as much as you've seen.
Right. And, and perhaps, uh, I mean, in, uh,
to some extent this would warrant, or at least
some people would immediately bring to the table an
anti realist position or stance and say something along
the lines of, oh, I, I mean, there's nothing
really more fundamental or smaller out there. It's just
the way you are conceptually, uh, uh, conceptually parsing
reality out. Right. Something along those lines.
Yeah. Uh, I suppose that's true. I mean, I'm
not quite sure what the end result of that
line of reasoning is though, is it just that
there's, we should just focus on reality as a,
as a whole rather than its parts. Um, BUT
you might still think that they are dependent relations
between those parts. So, so there's still questions that
we might, we might ask. Um, BUT, but you're
right. I mean, especially if there isn't epistemological any
way to know the truth. It might seem that,
uh, that it's, it's more of a conceptual um
exercise. Now. I, I mean, one thing that people
also say in this, in this uh uh discussion
about fundamentality that is sort of supposed to get
your intuitions rolling is that, well, the fundamental is,
is, is just what, what God had to do
to make the world, what it's like uh give
that sort of a, that sort of metaphor. Um
Now, I'm not saying that I necessarily like that
metaphor, but it does give you the idea that,
well, you, you just get the minimal bits in
place whatever they are, you know, they could be
idealistic pieces as well. Uh And uh if that's
enough to get you going with the world, then,
then, then so be it. Um YOU know, the
alternative is to list every single thing that there
is in the world, I suppose.
Yeah. And I mean, I guess that we also
have to keep in mind that when it comes
to the more epistemological side of things here, there's,
it's always the case that whatever approach you have
to epistemology, it doesn't necessarily have to be the
epistemology that works within science or the scientific method
it can be any other sort of epistemology. But
when you really get down to it, there's a
certain number of axioms that you just have to
accept as true and can't really be proven. Uh,
OTHER, I mean, you just have to take them
at face value and believe in them to really
then build up the rest of your epistemological approach.
I mean, at the end of the day, there's
nothing that we can do about that, right? It's
just how things work, I guess.
Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, it sounds to me
that you're kind of describing a sort of foundational
epistemology where you have to take some primitives, you
know, that you express your commitment to those and
then you try to try to construct the rest
of your epistemology on, on the basis of that
and, and, and I mean, that's right, although not
everyone accepts that sort of view of epistemology either.
So you could have a sort of uh what
might be called a coherent view of reality. Uh
uh Where, where you have all, all your different,
all, all the different parts of your epistemic framework,
sort of um uh being related to each other
and even being circularly dependent in some, some ways.
Um Now how, how exactly you specify that is,
is, is problematic because um it seems to violate
some of the basic principles that we have in
mind, which is uh uh that, you know, there's
always an explanation. Uh And the explanation isn't circular,
you know, if you, if you just keep on
uh giving the same answer to, to the why
question, then it doesn't seem like you're giving a
satisfactory answer necessarily.
But are there many, I, I guess we could
call them coherent iss out there? I mean, to,
to what extent is the uh how, how popular
is this view?
That that is a good question. I, I'm not
sure if I've got a good sense of how
popular it is in epistemology more broadly speaking. But
uh it has been been spilling into this discussion
of fundamentality, this idea of metaphysical coherent system. And
uh I mean, it's not a popular view, but
it is a view that is um um I
suppose defended by some explicitly and entertained by others
as, as one possible way to uh way to
understand reality where um I suppose you could motivate
it with, with contemporary science as well because we
don't seem to find those sort of independent building
blocks so easily, you know, uh uh for instance,
um if you consider uh quantum theory, uh things
seem to have dependencies that we uh wouldn't have
thought that they do if in uh in entangled
systems, for instance, and so on. So that gives
you, gives you a motivation to um to look
at, look at a more holistic or coherent explanation
uh of, of uh of the phenomenon that, that
we're exploring
Yeah. A a and please don't get me wrong
you when my audience, uh, by asking you whether
it is popular or not or how popular it
is. I was not trying to make an, a
popular argument here. I mean, because that's also usually
a fallacy. It can be informed to some extent,
but it's usually a fallacy. So I was just,
uh, out of curiosity trying to know or understand
better if there are many people out there defending
this view or, or not. Yeah,
I understand that. No. Yeah. But it's, it's a,
it's an alternative that's receive serious consideration. I'll give
you that.
OK. OK. So ju just to cover a few
more concepts here before we get into our last
question. So we've talked about things like natural kinds,
for example, what is essence, I mean be because
that's also another word that probably in common parlance
we use in slightly different ways than the philosophers
in metaphysics or Matam Metaphysics would use. So, what
do the philosophers mean by that?
Yeah. Good. I, I've, I've avoided the notion so
far because I suspected we might talk about it
as well and because it's uh it's, it's a
notion that um has an air of mystery about
it for a lot of people. So uh let's
start with an example. So, so um uh we
talked about natural kinds and it's, it's sometimes said
that the essence of a natural kind such as
gold is that. Well, it's just the element with
atomic number 79. So you look at its microstructure
or something like that. So its essence or its
nature is that it has that sort of microstructure
or look at Aristotle exam. Aristotle's examples of essence.
I mean, it's an Aristotelian notion really. So the
uh the essence of Socrates is that, you know,
his rational animal or something like that or capable
of humor, what have you, you know, uh you
can give all sorts of examples. It doesn't really
matter what the uh what the uh what, what
the correct answer is in, in some of those
cases, the point is that when you give the
essence of some entity, uh you, you're trying to
give something like it's like it's nature, it's uh
it's definition, but not just uh its definition in
language, but its real definition as Aristotle puts it.
So what it is to be that very entity
and it turns out to be quite difficult to
specify that uh you might start by listing uh
sort of necessary properties you think. Well, Socrates is
necessarily uh uh human uh Socrates couldn't have been
uh uh you know, a, a plant for instance.
Uh So, so that seems to tell you something
about the nature of Socrates. But, but in some,
some ways that's just uh your, your intuition about
it. Now, when, when I specify the notion of
essence, I, I like to, I like to give
a very precise uh account of it, which is
to say that, well, when you give the essence
of a given entity, when you, when you state
it, you're stating its identity and existence conditions. So
what it is to be that kind of entity
and what it would it take for it to
exist. And that's saying something a bit more than
just giving those sort of um intuitive uh accounts
of it because uh for something to exist, uh
you, you also know, need to know what other
things need to hold for that thing to be
able of existing. So, um you might think that
uh well, you might think that the natural kind,
water which is often thought of having as its
essence as it being H2O well, in some ways,
I mean, that's debatable, but there's something true there
for sure, which is to say that uh you
couldn't have water if you didn't have oxygen and
you didn't have hydrogen and not only that, but
oxygen and hydrogen need to be arranged in a
specific way. Uh So that you have, you have
the water molecule there. Uh So, so what you're
trying to do when you're trying to then give
the, the essence of, of some natural kind like
that is, is to try to figure out all
those connections that it might have to other entities.
Uh What are the conditions that need to be
in place for it to exist? And that I
suggest is something that you, you get partially with
the help of science and, and partially by uh
by the help of sort of more better physical
reasoning about it. Um But that's, that's just one
view about essence. Uh SOME people would regard it
as a, on a more conceptual basis that it
is uh something that uh that we capture in
language or that uh it's just the necessary properties
that something has or you know, some sort of
a bundle of the properties that uh that thing
has. So there's debate about what exactly essence, how,
how we should metaphysically characterize essence.
Do you think that uh scientists use terms like
essence in a similar way that philosophers do? Because
for example, in biology nowadays, it's very common for
us to hear from evolutionary biologists that we shouldn't
think about species in essentialist terms that there are
many anti essentialist stances in science out there, not
only in biology, but also many times in sociology
when it comes to terms like race, for example,
and stuff like that. So, uh uh I mean,
as a philosopher, how do you look at the
way uh scientists in those examples and others use
the term essence? Do you think that it's similar
to the way philosophers use it or not?
Well, it's, it's similar to the way that some
philosophers have used it in the past, at least.
So, uh those those anti essentialist tendencies in in,
in biology, for instance, that you, you mentioned uh
have as their source. Um KIND of what I
think is an obsolete view of uh of essence,
which is to regard essence as something that's necessarily
intrinsic. Uh So something like the DNA of a
biological species, for instance, so that is what, you
know, crypt and partner at one time when they
popularized, talk about as of natural clients might, might
have thought or certainly wrote. Uh But that is
a, that is a very constrained view of, of
what, what essences are, it might be correct for
some things. But um uh from the description that
I just gave you, uh it can't be the
whole story because uh to give the essence of
something ID, IIII, I think that we need to
give the relations that it has to other things
as well. So for a biological species that would
presumably in include its history or its uh or
its lineage, not just its, its DNA. So this
is debated. There, there are people who still uh
defend forms of biological essentialism, but they are almost
exclusively people who uh somehow include extrinsic properties such
as the historical lineage that um uh biological species
might have. And I think that that's the only
way that we should ever have understood essentialism. So
there's a bit of a misconception and a bad
reputation for the notion of essence because of this.
Mhm So we've talked about essence Uh I wanted
to ask you also about uh concepts like ground
and modality and then to understand the relationship that
essence, ground and modality have among them. So tell
us first perhaps about ground and then we'll go
through the rest.
Yeah, good. Um So, so the notion of, of
ground or grounding is, is, is uh kind of
a term of art in philosophy right now, which
has been enjoying AAA lot of popularity in recent
years. Uh But we've already, I think because we've
already touched on topics like fundamentality, it might be
easiest to specify it in, in those terms. So
some people think that uh what fundamentality is about
is, is really just about what grounds what, so
I've thought about this in terms of dependence and
grounding is a type of metaphysical dependence relation. Uh
If, if usually, usually it's conceived in this sort
of way. So you might say that, well, let's
start from the H 2 h2o molecule. Uh You'd
say that the existence of the H2O molecule is
grounded in the existence of the hydrogen and the
oxygen or the fact that the hydrogen or oxygen
exist and the existence of those atoms is grounded
in the, in the fact that their, you know,
parts exist and so on. And you might end
up at the fundamental level like this. So this
is just a type of dependence uh dependence structure
really which uh which is captured with the notion
of of grounding, uh something holds in virtue of
something else. Uh There's, there's a bit of a
debate about how best to characterize grounding, what, what
the, what the properties of this type of relation
is. And there's a debate also about whether this
is the only notion of dependence that we need
or whether there are different kinds of notions of
dependence. Uh I'm perhaps more inclined to think that
the latter that uh while grounding is a useful
concept, we may need other notions of dependence as
well. But um it's probably the most popular way
to formulate this notion of fundamentality. It's just trying
to find the ground level as it as it
were or what, what uh everything bottoms out out
on
and then what is modality
good. So, modality is um is a broader term
that in philosophical context is usually uh captured with
possibility and necessity, but it includes other things as
well in philosophy. Uh We talk about deontic modality
for instance. So uh I have a, I have
a duty to uh be respectful for other people
that would be a sort of a, a moral
concept. Um But uh but the most common usage
is probably uh to uh to the notions of
possibility and, and necessity. So, uh uh those are,
those are moral concepts and mortal epistemology would study
the epistemology of those moral concepts. How do we
know that something is necessary for instance?
And so what is then the relationship between essence
ground and modality.
So um if we start with essence and modality,
uh they were, they were conceived uh at some
point to be uh really the uh two sides
of the same coin again. So you might say
that uh uh what is uh what is necessary
is essential and what is accidental is, is possible.
So, um so I listed those necessary properties that
Socrates might have, you might give the essence of
Socrates in this sort of way, but that isn't
quite right according to sort of Aristotelian line of
thinking, um essence would, would be a prior notion
to modality in this sort of way. So all
the, all the moral truths that you might have
all the truths that you might state about neces,
necessity or possibility would ultimately be um made true
in virtue of the natures of things, the essences
of things. So if that's right, then essence is
the prior uh prior concept and you can explain
modality or reduce modality to essence. Now, that's it's
a slightly controversial view, but there is a significant
number of people in the sort of the r
Cilian camp who would, would subscribe to something like
this. And in fact, you could, you could try
to express this relationship in terms of grounding. So
sometimes you, you would hear people saying that modality
of necessity is grounded in essence. Now, I actually
don't think that that's quite right. But uh uh
that's uh how you might see that these, all
these three notions would be related that that grounding
is uh is something that explains these uh these
relations between different things and uh what the relationship
between essence and modality is just this. Um But
uh this is slightly complicated because uh if you,
I I just said that you could reduce modality
to essence grounding is not always thought of as
a reductive concept like this. So you might think
that even if the higher level things are grounded
in the low level things that doesn't make the
higher level things any less real than the low
level things. So it's just expresses a notion of
dependence between them. So how exactly you relate, all
these notions will depend a little bit on how
you think about uh the correct way of of
cashing out both grounding and uh and the relationship
between us and some modality if you like. Mhm
That's a very brief introduction.
Yeah. Sure, sure. Maybe somewhere in the future, we
can dive deeper into the, the questions that would
arise here. But I, I mean, I would imagine
that when it comes to thinking, for example, about
what is, I guess we could say essential to
a particular um category. Le le le let's say
we are talking about humans. What is a human?
Uh I mean, we could say, oh, it's an
individual from the species, almost sapiens or it's a
living being that has these or that kind of
uh psychological properties, for example, that distinguishes them from
individuals of other uh species out there. Uh And
we perhaps everyone would agree that when it comes
to the accidentals, I mean, the fact that I
was born in Portugal and Portuguese, I guess that
everyone would agree that, that when it comes to
thinking about what the human is, that would be
just an accidental property and the fact that I
have brown hair and all of that. Right?
Um Yes, I mean, all, all that you say
is, is, is right? But um maybe I missed
on with what question you want me to focus
on.
Uh I mean, I was just, I was just
giving that for, for the audience that uh as
an example, I mean, in terms of the, perhaps
some of the ways by which sometimes philosophers think
about something that is necessary or something that is
just accidental.
That, yeah, that's right. Yeah, I mentioned the accidental
properties without really uh describing that. But yeah, that's
right. Uh All those sort of things or it's
accidental that, that I'm a philosopher or that Socrates
was a philosopher rather than a carpenter or something
like that. Uh That's, that's usually right. But then
when it comes to specifying the, the really necessary,
more essential properties, then that, that may be uh
a more difficult question.
Mhm Right. No. Yeah. Be because again, we can
try to perhaps ground it in a way in
uh DNA, differences in DNA, between different species or
even do not think about species at all. And
cash it in nonbiological terms. What, what makes for
a human and what is a nonhuman? I mean,
it's, it's very complicated. It can and cash it
in religious terms if you want it. I guess
so and base it all in, I don't know,
revealed truth or something along those lines or some
sort of theology. But anyway, moving on, um I,
I want to ask you about another concept before
we get into our last question. So what is
the structure?
Mm Structure. Yeah, we've, we've talked a lot about
structure of reality actually in, in passing here. Uh
BUT just in a sort of uh superficial uh
such just as a superficial notion really. So the
notion is used as a, as a sort of
specific technical technical term. But I think that maybe
the best way to, to conceive of it is
as uh uh dependence relations. So whatever dependence relations
hold in the world, that's a notion that I
keep going back to as well. So whatever structure
that is that there is in the world must
be, must be somehow um governed by dependence relation
of, of, of some sort. Um And they could
be the sort of uh existence conditions. So something
depending for its existence on another thing that would
give you a sort of a structural relation. Uh
And uh and some people think that when they
talk about structure, they are just talking about fundamentality
or grounding or the relationship between those. So all
of these notions are, are very closely related. Um
But uh people might differ then uh depending on,
on how they specify one of those notions, what,
what happens to the others.
Mhm And, and so the final question I would
like to ask you is you wrote this very
interesting article where you argue that there are no
building blocks to reality. So what is the main
argument there? And by the way, what, what do
you mean by building blocks in this particular context?
Yeah. So uh I think you're referring to a,
a AAA popular article that I, that I wrote
on this, um which I, I think that the,
the title is, is, is more provocative than I
would like to be because I, I, I'd like
to be more neutral on the question. But, but
often, often, often we journalists want us to, to
have a Clickbait titles just to get that out
of the way. But uh but II, I do
take that option seriously in any case. So I'm
happy to talk about it. So uh so start
with the building building blocks. So, so the building
blocks is just a um an intuitive term for
whatever, whatever the fundamental things might be. So, so
I like to think of it in terms of
uh what I specified before. So the minimal uh
sort of minimal set of, of, of things or
even conditions that gives you everything else. But you
could think of it just as the, you know,
the standard model of particle physics or something like
that. Um So, so if those are your building
blocks, what does it mean if there aren't any,
well, it might mean something like the infinite structure
that we sort of uh uh passed, passed on
in, in passing. So, so uh uh there are
no building blocks if there is an in, in
infinite descent of, of, of structure, if you like
going and, and there's never any, any bottom level
that you, you encounter. Um But I think that
uh even in that sort of scenario, there is
a way to, to, to develop an interesting view
because uh even if you had an infinite descent,
uh it could be, it could be uh uh
repeating in some sense. So, so if you, if
you think of um uh us finding some sort
of substructure in electrons, for instance, there's some sub
electrons and uh and then you, then you were
to find that uh there's some sort of patterns
that repeat in that, in that structure that you
find from that, that maybe that you could express
in a, in a, in an algorithmic form of
some sort. Uh Then that would give you a
principle that would sort of produce uh whatever you
have in reality, the minimal conditions for producing whatever
else you have in reality. So even, even in
that sense, um there could be something that could
be conceived of as a, as a structure and
as even potentially fundamental structure, even if you wouldn't
really have that, that sort of building blocks uh
metaphor in a, in a, in a sensible uh
sense because you wouldn't have the, the smallest things
in a, in a way. So, um uh if,
if we're open minded to, about what those building
blocks might be, then uh then I, I feel
uh that it's unlikely that there wouldn't be any
but uh uh I would leave the option open.
OK. But, but do you think that if this
view would be right? Um That we, uh I,
I mean, even going uh just a level above
electrons and protons that it would make sense for
us to still talk about things like atoms or
that we should just, when it comes to the
f the fundamental structure of reality, perhaps we should
try to cash it out in different uh terms.
So, uh are you asking if this view were
true that there weren't any building blocks in reality?
Then, then would that would that undermine our, our,
our talk of to build
our, our talk of um part, let's put it
in terms of particles. So OK, so, so perhaps
even moving one level above electrons and protons to
the level of atoms? I mean, would that also
be undermined in some way or?
Yeah. Yeah. Ok. I see. Yeah. So, people, uh,
people have argued that if you, if you didn't
have any building blocks then, then, uh, uh, these
sort of compost entities like atoms, you know, wouldn't,
wouldn't get off the ground as it were because
you don't have, you don't have any basis for
them. I don't think that's, that's quite right because
um you would still have these dependence relations that
we've been talking about in place. Uh So you
would have structure in this sort of sense. Uh
So, uh even, even if, um even if you
couldn't give, give uh the sort of reductive basis
for those things, uh the, at, at, at the
level of atoms, for instance, because you wouldn't be
able to point on the smallest things that they
depend on. You would still have uh uh isolated
uh uh uh sort of networks of dependence that
could be informative for you. So you could still
say that, well, the atoms definitely depend on um
the protons and the neutrons and the electrons in
some way. Uh And that would be informative and
true. Uh Even if you, even if you didn't
know what, what comes after that, so it depends
how you, how you constrain that, that discussion. But
I do think that it could still make sense
to talk about these things. I mean, it better
make sense because we talk about them.
Uh But, but do you think that this would,
uh, if that was true, it would warrant a
sort of uh relational ontology instead of a substance
ontology or not necessarily?
Yeah, I mean, it could speak in favor of,
of some sort of relational uh ontology. Um But
uh the trouble with that relational ontology, well, 11
issue with relational ontology is that we often think
of relations as being relations between things between entities,
not necessarily substances, but between things or potentially properties.
So it's difficult to, to uh get rid of
that idea. And in fact, there's the opposite idea
that you could, you could develop. It's that there
are really no relations, there are just uh the
things that have dependencies between them but, but those
dependencies are entirely explained by whatever properties those two
things have. Uh SO that the relation between them
is, is entirely uh internal, we might say. So,
uh let's say, let's say that uh you are
taller than me. I don't know if that's true,
but let's say that you are taller than me.
Um Well, that relation between us holds just in
terms of uh your height and my height, but
the taller than relation doesn't exist necessarily in reality.
So that this way we can problem either of
you really. So the relational ontology, uh are there
just the relations or uh some sort of a
substance ontology or property ontology? Are there just those
things rather than the relations. And, um, it's not
easy to come up with a conclusive argument for
either of you, in fact.
Yeah, I guess that this, in a sense goes
back to something that we discussed earlier when I
mentioned process ontology and now I've been talking about
it over the past few months with psychologists, neuroscientists
and so on because I, I mean, again, they
still mentioned the substances there,
right? Yeah. Uh Even if you don't mention substances
by name, it's difficult to get around the idea
that there is uh there's something that sort of
holds properties together or something that uh the relations
relate. Uh SO uh or, or something that survives
through a process, you know, has identity over time.
Um UNLESS you look at the process in a
more holistic uh holistic fashion. So uh yeah, I
think all, all these options are are on the
table.
Yeah, maybe we need more Buddhists in science to
help us deal with, with real, with cashing things
out in e exclusively relational or process ontology terms
and just doing away with substances. Maybe it's a
limitation of uh our Western culture. I don't know.
Well, you could be, you could be right. Um
I mean, there are, there are examples of process
onto just in western Western culture as well, of
course, but you may be right that it's a,
it's a more um uh sort of more well
researched topic uh outside the, the uh the western
uh metaphysics if you like. And I mean, and,
and same goes actually for some of those uh
other topics that we mentioned the sort of coherent
networks, holistic views and in indeed those infinite uh
networks as well. So, um uh so people in
uh studying fundamentality have, have uh uh drawn inspiration
from uh from Eastern uh philosophy for these, these
topic as well.
So, so perhaps we're taking in reverse and it
would be the highest levels that would be the
fundamental, it would be actually culture, that is the
fundamental level of reality. And then you would derive
all the rest from uh that
perhaps. So, perhaps so, uh I don't know if
that's still going to be realist.
Well, we, we would have to perhaps discuss that
with o other people as well and in another
conversation. So, uh doctor uh or Thomas just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Yeah. Um It'll, it'll be easy because my name
is very unique if you can spell it, right?
Uh So, so Google is your friend but uh
my, my website is just uh TT A hko.net
and uh all my papers are there, but they're
also on Google scholar and Phil papers uh which
is the archive for philosophical work that is very
helpful. Um Yeah.
OK, great. I'm leaving links to that in the
description of the interview. And thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It was really fun talking
with you. Thanks very much, Ricardo. Likewise. It was
uh it was uh very entertaining.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends, David Wilson,
the dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati
Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Giorgio, Theophanous Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa
Anton, Erickson. Charles Murray, Alex Chao Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Dey Junior, Old Arrington, Starry Michael Bailey
then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson,
Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week
in the brand and Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man,
George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander
Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J
Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank
Luca Stein, Tom Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman,
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.